Source PDF: 5b4f4fae-Preventative_Maintenance_Guide.pdf
Extracted via pdftotext -layout for the Aquafire troubleshooter.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

5/12/26, 10:16 PM                                                     Preventative Maintenance Guide

                                             We're here to help (877) 888-4260 | sales@aquafire.com




                      Preventative Maintenance
                                Guide

        Download: Aquafire® Preventative Maintenance Guide

        NEW! Preventative maintenance is key to a long lasting vibrant flame and we've introduced a new way
        to make maintenance easier:

        1. To significantly reduce the buildup and effects of hard water on your Aquafire, we recommend the Vapor
        Pure water softener system. Engineered alongside water quality experts to be specifically used with
        Aquafire Water Vapor Fireplace inserts. The Vapor Pure Water Softener System is provided complimentary
        with your purchase of an Aquafire Pro or Aquafire with Direct Plumb Kit.




          Need more help?
         Preventative Maintenance Guide



        Steps for cleaning only the mist makers (complete every 3 months):



https://www.aquafire.com/pages/maintenance                                                                          1/6
5/12/26, 10:16 PM                                             Preventative Maintenance Guide

            Turn your fireplace off then unplug the mist maker wire from the power outlet located at each of the
        large round mist tube housings

            Remove mist maker racks from the mist tubes. Depending on the amount of scale present, you can
        simply put a few drops of white vinegar directly on the white center of the mist maker and let it set for a few
        minutes before rinsing it off and returning the rack to the mist tube.

            For assemblies that have signs of algae build up or visible hard water residue, remove the 4 screws that
        attach the mist maker to the rack so you can soak the mist maker submerged in white vinegar for 10-20
        minutes and clean the bottom of it as well; remember to keep the power cords attached to the mist makers
        out of the vinegar solution

            When the soaking period is complete, rinse thoroughly with water. You can use a soft tooth brush to
        gently brush the white surface of the mist maker as well as metal casing and the bottom to remove any
        visible stains. Do not use a stiff bristle brush or a Scotch-brite pad on the mist makers as this can cause
        permanent damage to them

            Re-attach the mist maker to the rack and then place the mist maker rack back into the mist tube

            Reconnect the mist maker power feed to the power outlet being sure to push the wire all the way down
        the slot in the side of the mist tube before putting the cap back on


                         Aquafire Mist Maker Maintenance Guide (Part 1): How to Clean
                         Aquafire




                                                                                         Watch on




        Steps for cleaning the entire system (complete every 6 months):

            Turn off the water feed if your unit is direct plumbed

            Use the flexible hose that came with your fireplace and connect it to the drain port on the front of the
        unit (AWA/AWP models) or on the top if you have the AWPR series



https://www.aquafire.com/pages/maintenance                                                                                2/6
5/12/26, 10:16 PM                                             Preventative Maintenance Guide

            Put the other end of the hose in a 3-5 gal. bucket and push and hold the left button (B2) which starts the
        draining process. When the drain cycle stops, there will still be some water in the lower tank reservoirs.
        This is normal and if possible, remove the remaining few cups of water from the each of the mist tubes by
        using a smaller 1/4" siphon hose, a large “turkey baster”, or a small sponge. Avoid using any material that
        could flake off or leave debris in the lower tank

            Once the water is out, add approximately 1/2 gallon of vinegar by using your fill/drain hose and pressing
        the B1 button to run the manual fill cycle or simply pour equal amounts of vinegar directly into the mist
        tubes being careful not to overfill. The system will have enough in it when the vinegar level in the mist tube
        is just above the top of the mist maker itself (approx. 2”). Overfilling may result in excess vinegar leaking
        out of the front fans.

            Like the mist maker soak above, let the vinegar sit in the tanks for approx. 10-20 minutes to loosen hard
        water scaling that may have collected on the float sensors

            Do Not operate the fireplace during this vinegar cleaning process

            After the soak period is complete (and before you drain it), agitate the vinegar in each of the lower tanks
        to help break up any remaining residue on the float sensors. Do this by raising and lowering the mist maker
        rack vigorously so you can hear it splashing in the lower tank. Do this 10-15 times in each of the mist tubes
        in your unit

            Drain the vinegar just as you did the water using the drain hose, hose bib, and B2 button

            Once the vinegar is out, fill the unit with fresh water either by turning the water back on (if permanently
        plumbed), or by using the hose and fill cycle (B1) button

            You’ll want to fill and drain the entire system twice to ensure that you’ve removed all the vinegar and
        contaminates that are suspended in the water. After you’ve filled the system back up for the 3rd time, go
        ahead and run the unit as you would normally


                         Aquafire Mist Maker Maintenance Guide (Part 2): Lower Tank &
                         Aquafire




                                                                                         Watch on


https://www.aquafire.com/pages/maintenance                                                                                3/6
5/12/26, 10:16 PM                                             Preventative Maintenance Guide



        ** IMPORTANT NOTE: 2-3 days after a cleaning you may still experience mist issues. This is most likely
        caused by leftover debris from your initial cleaning. Debris can continue to slough off days after a deep
        vinegar clean. This is completely normal! If you continue to experience mist issues, please open the mist
        tubes, check for debris and re-agitate the mist rack and float sensor. At this point, you may need to flush
        out the water to rid the tank of debris or complete another full clean.


        The more frequently you clean the insert, the less likely you are to experience delayed debris after a
        cleaning. Once you get into a cleaning schedule, the mist and float sensor issues should dissipate.




     Contact Us


     Do you have any question?
     Got questions about Aquafire inserts or need help placing an order? Reach out and one of our Customer
     Experience team members would love to assist you!


     Our customer support is available Monday to Friday: 9am-4:30pm EST.


     Average answer time: 24h




              Name



              E-mail



              State



              Message




https://www.aquafire.com/pages/maintenance                                                                            4/6
5/12/26, 10:16 PM                                               Preventative Maintenance Guide


                    Send message




                                             Why choose Aquafire?



                                                         Eco-Friendly

                    Runs on Tap Water and plugs into a standard outlet. Fireplace tech approved by Mother Earth.




     Sign up for updates

         E-mail




     Useful Stuff                                                     Help

     Gallery                                                          Contact Us

     Become a Dealer                                                  FAQs

     Locate a Dealer                                                  How It Works

     Press                                                            Aquafire In the Wild

     MAP Policy                                                       Help Desk & Resources

     Privacy Policy                                                   Instructional Videos

     Shipping Policy                                                  Replacement Parts

     Return Policy                                                    Maintenance Guide

     Terms of Service                                                 Interactive Enclosure Guide


https://www.aquafire.com/pages/maintenance                                                                         5/6
5/12/26, 10:16 PM                                          Preventative Maintenance Guide

                                                                 Water Hardness Calculator

                                                                 Fireplace Service

                                                                 Eco-Friendly FIreplaces

                                                                 Warranty


     Aquafire® is the exclusive North American distribution partner of A|Fire Design

     Address:
     135 Sweeten Creek Rd.
     Asheville, NC 28803
     United States

     (877) 888-4260
     sales@aquafire.com


     Social Media:
     Instagram: @aquafire
     YouTube: @aquafire_official




           United States (USD $)




     © 2026, Aquafire.




https://www.aquafire.com/pages/maintenance                                                   6/6
